All right. Uh, good afternoon everybody. I'm uh, ready to get started. So, this is, uh, a pretty good turnout. This is, uh, a little better than I was expecting for a talk where I'm not going to actually show you any code or anything new at the end of the second day of the conference. If I knew it was going to be uh, this good, I wouldn't have bribed all of my co-workers to show up. But, you know, thank you very much for for coming. Um, so this is life and app engine production for Google IO uh 2011 and uh you've got some hashtags up here suggested if you want to Twitter during the during the talk and we've got a very convenient and memorable feedback URL that you can v visit if you'd like to give us feedback during the talk or after and we'd very much appreciate if you do that. Um, so I'm ready so let's get started. So, uh, who am I? I'm Michael Handler. I'll be your cruise director for this talk. I'm the tech lead for the App Engine SR team. I'm based out of San Francisco. Uh I'll be co-presenting with my uh with my first mate Alan Green, also from the App Engine SR team. He's based out of the Sydney office. And we've got the hashtags and the feedback URL up there again. Uh you know, just just in case you missed it in the last five minutes. Um so everybody says we should have a table of contents. So I'm going to get through this as quickly as I can. So who am I? What do I do? What do I do all day? How does that affect App Engine? What has happened to App Engine that we expected? What's happened to App Engine that we didn't expect? What do we do to make App Engine more reliable when those things happened to us? Both the stuff we expected and the stuff we didn't expect. And based on all that, if you're building a production system on App Engine or offsite of App Engine, what can you do to make your App Engine um your application more reliable? And then we've got a demo of some monitoring technology that we're really happy about and that we're entering trusted tester with. So I've said S sur twice and I haven't defined it so I should probably fix that. So S sur is site reliability engineer. So this is a program that started in Google uh you know some number of years ago and here you can see uh our mascot with our logo on it. Uh we are concerned with the lack of downtime or rather uptime. So Google site reliability engineering. So we have a very simple mission which is Google products need to be fast. They need to be available whenever you put google.com into your browser. whenever your website requests, you know, content ads or whatever, that has to happen. It has to happen all the time, 24 hours a day, uh, 365 days a year or 366, just like that as fast as possible so that the users are happy. Um, so what we end up doing doesn't show up in uh new product releases, new SDKs, change lists, etc., etc., etc. A lot of the work that we do is invisible. And we wanted to say we want to get out there and let people know that Google has S sur teams because we want people to know that we exist because we do. Um and to for you to understand the kind of work that we're doing both for you uh on App Engine and for all other Google products. So what happens when Google products launch is that the developers run them. So they're spending all of their time getting the product stable and directing traffic to it and saying, "Okay, let's encourage people to use it. Let's get out there and advocate for it." And then it gets a certain level of stability and a certain level of growth. And we're saying okay wow people actually like this product and want to use it. And the developers are splitting their time between well let's make the product as uh as stable as we can while growing it and also adding these new features. And it just doesn't end up working out really well that we found. It's better if you can let people focus on adding new features and let other people specialize on uh making it stable for the existing users and enabling growth. And this is where the SRRES come in. So we originally had S SR teams docketed to search and ads the, you know, the original core Google products that tells you how long ago how old this program goes back because, you know, the search the search developers and the ads developers needed to spend all of their time adding the features and they had lost scope of all the things that we needed to do to deal with the volume of Google search queries that were coming in every day. So, we're talking about App Engine reliability and the SR team, we're the people that, you know, we're the people that do that. So, you may sort of think, well, what does that day look like for us? Well, we're sitting around and then the alarm goes off and we go, "Oh my god, something's wrong." We all pile out, we fix the problem, put the fire out, everybody's back and happy and doing what they're doing, and we go back into the firehouse, and we sit around, play cards, do, you know, and wait till we'll, you know, till the alarm goes off again. So if you've been on App Engine for a long time and you know there were we had some instability problems in the past, you might think a little differently of us. You might say like, "Wow, there's a reliability team. They should take off their clown noses and they should, you know, get back to work, right?" But the reality of this is actually a little different, which is to say that, you know, we're technical professionals. We're engineers and we look at this from an engineering perspective. We certainly respond in with a priority when there's a problem, but what we need to do in addition to fixing it is make sure that it doesn't happen again. It's not just enough to do crisis response. You actually have to do full engineering to understand the problems, to understand what's going on. What we end up spending most of our time doing is managing complexity. Uh we, you know, you've all designed and architected systems and you've put diagrams up there and they're beautiful and simple and you go, "Wow, this is fantastic. It's going to work." And that diagram never survives first contact with the enemy. And that's even more true at Google than it is, you know, outside at smaller scale. So all of these things, you know, your your perfect plan gets overridden by reality. So where does that complexity come from? Well, we all run on computers and we all know that computers are very reliable things that never do anything that are is at all mysterious or that you don't expect. Um, and you know when when they're uh and that's you know that might actually be slightly true when they're you know standing alone, but they we live them we put them in data centers and they're all in interconnected between each other. and a computer that was having a great time just sort of doing its thing. Uh now it's getting bothered by its neighbor down the row and it's not as reliable as it used to be. It's asking it to do things. Crazy things are happening. Traffic's patterns are going on. That's it's just confusing. Um and then we make the situation worse because we've got data centers everywhere all around the world and they're all interconnected at high speed. And this means that you know no now can your nice reliable computer be bothered by a computer near it. It can be bothered by a computer halfway around the world. Um, and this is even before we've got the the uh oh, we've got the infrastructure, the support infrastructure that if you've built this global network of applications, servers, data centers, and all of these other things, you need a bunch of support infrastructure. I'm going to touch on exactly what that looks like in a little bit. And then right, you've got the traffic coming from the users, more traffic than you could ever expect uh that you could ever deal with uh that you've you ever thought that you would deal with. And it comes every day without fail, you know, with peaks and valleys. And you just you have to be ready. You know, whatever you happen to you today at peak traffic, if you started having problems, you're going to happen it's going to happen to you just as badly tomorrow. And you need to be ready to deal with it. And we even haven't gotten into the circumstances of random chance. We have a lot of computers. We have a lot of data centers. We have a lot of complicated systems. They all interact with each other. And each one of those systems every day is a chance for the universe to roll the dice and say, "Maybe something weird is going to happen to you." So you have to be ready for these for these kind of things as well. So I had a very simple balancing act over here. So we've got stability on one side and over here we've got u we've got the new features that the developers are carefully stacking on and we'll just balance this out. And it's not that simple. It's not that simple on the reliability side at all. So this is a quote from Leslie Lamport, a computer scientist who invented the Paxos distributed consensus algorithm. We use this inside App Engine on the high replication data store. A distributed system is one in which the failure of a computer you didn't even know existed can render your own computer unusable. And that's more or less a description of my day every day. Um, which is to say that there are, you know, we've got a, you know, the Rumsfeld reference up here. There are unknown unknowns. I come to work and something weird has happened. It might be from a computer I've heard of, it might not. And if it's one I've heard of, I probably know what to do. if you know if it's one I don't know what to if it's one I've never heard of before I need to figure out quickly restore everything to service and then you know go on making sure that that doesn't happen again. So we're talking about life in production and that's the Google production environment and what does that look like and you know where can I get one of these fantastic hard hats and ear protection for my day-to-day job. Um so App Engine's a cloud computing environment uh you know you all know this and Google has a cloud computing environment. We don't have a dedicated data center for App Engine. We don't have a dedicated set of machines for App Engine. We run App Engine inside the same cloud computing environment that Google does. Um, and so there's all of these layers of infrastructure inside Google's cloud computing environment. You've got like you've got the environ, you've got lock services, storage services, monitoring, configuration, and reporting, binary packages, and there's like I ran out of space before I could list all of the ones that I thought were really important. I know, right? there are computers and they need power, networking and cooling if they're going to operate, if they're going to be at all useful to us. Um, so it's interesting that uh we find ourselves somewhat in the same situation uh that our customers do in terms of running app engine. So you come to us and say, well, we want you to run this application for us. And we'll say that's fantastic. We'll totally do that. Um, but we don't run all of that, all those things that I just mentioned ourselves. We can't. There's not enough of us. and the con the specialization that would be that would be required for us to run every part of that infrastructure all the way down to the computers would be astronomical. We would need a huge team of people and we probably would wouldn't be consistently good at running all parts of it. So in the same way that you depend on us, we depend on further down the stack a bunch of people, a bunch of SRRES running the storage services, the lock service, the the cloud computing environment all the way down to data centers and hardware ops uh who keep on running you know the machines. Now we can't operate with them on a handshake basis in the same way that we can't operate with you on a handshake basis. Uh you know we there have been some discussion about the changes in app for app engine pricing model. we're charging, you know, we're we're we're changing the pricing model. It might be a little more expensive for people. We're saying we're asking this money of you because we're offering a certain amount of reliability. And in the same way, I can't just say, well, I depend on that infrastructure, uh, but you know, you guys are going to mostly run it for us, right? Um, because they understand the infrastructure and they can look at it and say it's got this much complexity. it's got we've got our own dependencies and we think it can be available this much amount of the time this many nines or this you know this much downtime per year and we look at what they offer us and say we can work with that we'll use your service or if it's below our threshold we say you know what we'd love to use it if you could bring it up to this level of reliability can we pay you you know in internal currency or favors or whatever it is and say like you know sometimes they say yes and sometimes they say no um and the reason that this is important is that mathematically we're depending on all of these services and you cannot be more reliable than the least reliable service that you rely upon. So we have to make a decision based on the reliability of the underlying services that we rely upon. And so what's some of the sources of this unreliability? Well, the software is not static. It's always changing. There's always bugs being found. There's always features being added. Um we're also always inc worried about efficiency and increasing efficiency. uh we have you know our computers if we can make a change across the board that rings 5% efficiency improvement in this subsystem across all of Google that's a lot of spare computing cycles that's a lot of power that's a lot of all that's a lot of money that we can save that we can use to you know use the same infrastructure to scale everything else um so this is software and it needs to be upgraded but we don't want to be you know it doesn't can't be like you know your laptop where it says well I want to install this software hold on while I reboot. Um, so we have to get this software out there into the production while uh, you know, not still while still having 24 by7 service for all of these Google applications. So we designed from the beginning for in place updates transparently as possible, which to say that there's an update going on right now in the background. We're slowly, you know, rolling it out. And you shouldn't notice anything except that like, you know, Gmail all of a sudden you, you know, your Gmail's chugging along and then it says, "Oh, wait. I need to reload." And you get your mailbox back again. And the UI is a little different. It wasn't like Gmail was like, "We're going to be down for six hours while we're doing an upgrade." We do this upgrade in place right up until the moment that we expose it to you. The infrastructure underlying it works the same way. When there's a new version of the storage subsystem, we just say roll it out slowly in the background, slowly enough that you know that that the services that are using on it are engineered to deal with that unreliability. But you can't do this with everything because some maintenance is too intrusive. Sometimes it requires, you know, intrusive software work. you actually have to take down part of the stack, rework it a little bit, bring it back up. Similarly, if they say, well, we want to take down half the data center to rework the power distribution units, fix the generator. Uh, oh, wait, the cooling is having problems. We can't, you can't just say like, you know, we're going to do this and, you know, hopefully everything will be all right. Um so what we do is we get out our calendar and we mark out and we say okay this given data center um we need to do a bunch of work on it and we do this on a regular schedule and we're going to gang up all of the really intrusive you know disruptive work that we need to do put it all together and say this data center is going to be out during this time period. Um and there's an interesting design pattern here which is to say that we don't say that every data center you know we're is we're going to try and keep it up as much as possible all of the time. We, you know, when you start launching a product at Google, you understand that the data center that you land in is going to blink out of existence for some amount of time every year. And what that means is that you have to be nimble. You have to be able to say, "Okay, when that happens, I need to be able to serve my user capacity somewhere else. I need to do it as transparently as possible. This has to be baked into your application from the beginning or you're going to take embarrassing outages every time this happens." So speaking of uh speaking of architecting for uh for data center failovers, how does this apply to app engine? Specifically the master slave configuration that we launched in. So we I've seen this uh you know talk I've seen this slide given a couple other times. So I'm going to sort of blaze through it a tiny bit. But so this is a very complicated app engine architectural diagram that you know our intellectual property that I'm revealing to you here for the price of admission. um which is that your application is serving out of data center A and reads and writes are happening to the data store and everything's great and we are asynchronously replicating from the data store in A to the data store over in B. Um and uh so everything is sort of well and good and then they say hey data center A is going to be unavailable for time period X and we pick a time a little advance of time period X and if you you've launched an application on master slave this is should be sort of familiar to you what what's going on but I'll show you under the covers. Um so we disable writes and so that you can continue reading but there's no changes coming into the data store and this is so that we can engage this bulk data copy process synchronizing data center A and data center B's data store and once that's done we are guaranteed that A and B are identical we can say all right we're ready to go and we flip the switch and we move uh data center B to be the master reads and writes are happening there the direction of replication is reversed and at this point we can take data center A offline for some amount of time and you know, we can they can do whatever they need to it with the power and the cooling and the hey he hey he hey he hey he hey he hey he hey he hey he hey he hey he heyi hey and you know your application continues to serve other than the fact that you know with no further outage other than the readonly period that we just mention made you go through so that's all well and good but it's also not very complicated if they if this was all that we had to deal with they wouldn't need sRes and I wouldn't have this job this very interesting and well-paying job so I want to talk a little bit about things that happened to us that we sort of didn't anticipate um and you know I there's a bunch of good stories here and I really wish I could tell then and and a lot of them I was like how about this one? They said no no no that that exposes a little too much of our infrastructure. This is what I could get cleared and it's oh they're so good. Um all right so we exposed a long time ago uh that uh Google doesn't have UPS's in our data centers. We have uh you know have you know big room full of batteries. Each server has a small UPS battery next to it connected to it providing battery backup in case the power goes out. Um, and so you know here's a store here's a server simplified that is running the storage process and it's accepting writes from the services. It's accepting rights from the network and committing them to disk and it's all really good. But you note that it's um the storage process is talking to a power management process and you say sort of well well why is that? Um it's so that we can do this which is an amazing optimization and I really really like it. um which is to say that if the power goes out uh we're running off of battery and rather than doing some kind of broadcast notification from a central location that oh hey the data center has lost power the server knows that as soon as it's happened that the power is off because it's running off of battery the wall power has gone away. Um and the great thing that can happen is that the storage process asks the power management process. says, "Hey, you know, it's be doing this periodically and it's saying, "What's the state of the power infrastructure?" You say, "Well, you know, why would it bother?" And so, it can do this, which is um when the power is out, it'll say, "Oh, wow. I shouldn't accept any more writes from the network." And the reason it does that is because we've accepted writes and they're maybe cached in memory. They may be, you know, in the in the application memory. They may be in the kernel memory. They may be in right cache on the disk. You know, the right has not necessarily been synchronously accepted from the network all the way down to the disk. So we want to buy ourselves some time to get that flush to happen which if this server is going to lose power then we want to you know have a guarantee that we have a or a high guaranteed chance that the data was all committed. So the storage process says I'm not going to accept any other rights and this works beautifully. So imagine you have a data center that looks like this with an array of storage nodes. Um and you know rightites are happening everywhere. A couple of the servers are down for maintenance, so they're denying rights and everything's happy. And then the power goes out and it looks like this. And it's just it's, you know, it's beautiful. Everybody says, "I'm not accepting rights." And as quickly as that happens, all of the services that we're trying to write to them realize, "Wow, nothing here in this data center is accepting rights. Let me return a deferral back to the client JavaScript that's running in the user's browser." And they say, "Hey, we're having a a problem. Let's try again in a minute." So the state that the user is trying to submit isn't lost. We didn't say, "Oh, yeah, we accepted it." and you know it's all it's all good. We can you know ripple that we the minute this happens we can ripple that error back out to the user in uh in a way that allows them to cleanly retry. It's beautiful. And of course I'm telling you the story is because it didn't work out that way. Um which is to say that uh the power management process is talking to the power supply. Power supplies are spooky spooky analog crap. And occasionally the power management process would talk to the battery uh or talk to the power supply and say, "So, hey, how's the battery?" And the power supply would say, "There's no battery attached to me." Really? Okay. Um, you know, I thought I just asked you a minute ago and you said there was, but maybe maybe they disconnected it. Okay, that's fine. And then if you asked it again a minute later, it would say, "Oh, oh, right. No, sorry. There's a battery and here's its sort of like, you know, voltage and charge and and general health." Um but there was a race condition in the middle here where the storage process would uh ask the power management process so what's the state of the power and the power management process would say uh it's good you know we're we're up we clearly have power but I don't have a battery installed just so you know and the power manage storage process made a decision that was not actually very good which is it decided well if there's no battery I don't need to keep on talking to you anymore that thread that I was running that was talking to the uh power power process I'm going to save some CPU do by uh by just shutting that down because there's no point if there's no battery when the when the power goes out I'm just going to crash why should I bother and you can sort of uh you can think about the consequences of this which is to say that the power goes out and the server keeps on going you know yep sure I'll take some rights you do whatever you want you know I'll take them into you know into uh in and you know continually hold them in memory and then we had a power outage uh that looked like this um which is to say that you know most of the servers uh accepted you know said oh wait I don't you know, I'm not going to accept any any rights. But a handful of them had triggered this bug. And when they triggered this bug, they said they continued accepting rights. And so this was fine because well, okay, we went on to um uh we went on to the generator and that was great. And the generator came back and I have another slide of all green and you know, it's all fantastic. And then um then the generator's turbos started glowing cherry red and um the hardware offices guys on site said, "Well, you know, I don't know what the procedure is for this, but it looks like it's about to explode." and when it's about to explode, I think we're going to turn it off. So, they went over and they hit the big red button, and they really have a big red button for this. And, you know, I'm glad they got to hit it at least once. And they turned the generator off. So, we're back on battery again. And the utility power hasn't come back on. So, we're in this situation. And all of these servers are accepting rights and accepting rights and accepting rights and then they all crash. And yeah, so that didn't really sort of work out so well for us. Um I should I'm going to point out that we didn't have any data loss in this situation because when the power went out we drained the drain data center of traffic. We have the ability to globally redirect traffic away from that data center when we said okay something's going on. So user traffic went away but there were still some background processes running doing you know batch processing of various stuff and when those things uh those things were still running even though the front-end traffic had gone away and so these they were happily writing and happily writing and happily writing and then we lost that data uh temporarily when the servers crashed when they came this this uh drastically increased our return to service time for this data center right it it took it out for much longer than statistically it takes us to return a data center to out to service after we've had a power outage. That's no good for us. So, you know, we fixed that. Um, so we learned some things from this, which is that you can't always trust your monitoring. Um, it'll lie to you and sometimes it'll lie to you intermittently, which is awesome. Um, you know, and, uh, you know, I, you know, this is a trust but verify, you know, Ronald Ronald Reagan's, you know, excellent one one quote. Um, and say that don't make any decisions permanently based on one data point, right? you know, and you know, like I said, the system may lie to you and some optimizations are not worth doing it. You know, it was very nice of the storage process to say, I'm going to save you this fractional amount of CPU by not running this query to the uh um you know, to the power management process, but it cost us all of this time in cleanup and debugging and you know, general frustration afterwards. So, you know, this is a that's a good lesson for there. Um, so I've got a quote here uh from Klay Cavaness who runs Google's MacOps organization. This is these numbers in here are about uh our laptops fleet. They don't tell you anything about our production data centers. I'm not disclosing anything that has not been uh that has been tightly held before. Um, a large fleet like ours means that a bug that crops up only 0.5% of the time affects over 100 people. It becomes difficult to file bugs when the how to reproduce section is do this 25,000 times. And I tell you the story because uh the next story is really sort of all about that. Um so one day somebody's pager goes off and it says um uh the big table uh a big table not the entire big table but a table inside a big table is gone. And he comes up and says well you know online and says well what's going on we're serving errors out of this application now. Um and he looks at the why did this go away? uh and he looks at the big table master and he says oh okay it says that you know there was an RPC to delete that table from this server and this user at this time and they went back and looked at that server um and that server had recently there was a process that had run on that by that user on that server and it had a stack trace and it said function A function B function C destroy table and I went huh and that was funny because if you looked at the code for function C it never should have called destroy table so at this point we're going okay you know what's going on is this enemy action or you know what what what the hell. Um so this was a a language with virtual method dispatch unfortunately. Um and we pulled that server out of uh out of commission and we put it in through the equivalent of Google Memest x86 and you know we after long enough we found out that oh hey if you you know let it run long enough under high enough load it starts corrupting contents of memory occasionally. And as near as we can tell, what happened here was there was an in function C there was an index into you know whatever function it was going to call give big table a hug or something and um you know and and and the processor uh corrupted in memory just perfectly to set of instead of calling uh that function let's call destroy table instead and again this was no data loss here because after big table is deleted it's not instantaneously garbage collected we have some services we have you know facilities where we can go okay let's recreate it at the state of the last you know right before the deletion. Um on the other hand that's not acceptable to us because the minute that this happened we started serving errors out of that data center for that product right so that you know you know we're serving 500s or whatever the error code was or please try again later you know etc etc etc yeah it's it's good times it's really good times um so what do we learn about this is that uh again trust but verify I have seen every piece of hardware at Google attempt to corrupt data Um, and I and I'm I'm almost I'm I'm I'm almost not kidding. Um, processors, memory, hard drives, power supplies, uh, network switches, network cables. I have not heard a story where, um, the dolly that we use to move machines around or a bad power cable has corrupted data. But I wouldn't be surprised if somebody came to me and told me a story where that had happened. Like, when you have enough pieces of hardware, they they're out to get you. I don't believe that there are bad people but I believe that there is actually bad hardware I you know and and um you need check sums you need checksum on data transmission checks sums for data at rest and and verify them because you know if you transmit the data and it doesn't you know it doesn't comes out at the other end it's not what you expected somewhere in there is somewhere in something in there there's a there's a bad piece of hardware and you need to find it and get it out of your infrastructure as quickly as possible because it's causing unless you're you know maybe causing data loss and potent potential data loss, something that you're going to have to recover. Find these things and get rid of them. They are the bad apples. Um, and you know, when these things happen, you have to you you can't be sure that you know that's like I said that story suddenly a big table was gone and nobody coped to having done it and you know were we hacked was you know was some disgruntled employee discoing it. No, this is the uh the evidence that you know if you give in an infinite number of monkeys a typewriter you know one of them will write Shakespeare. If you put enough pieces of Google hardware and you roll enough dice over days and days and days, eventually one of them will spontaneously attempt to delete your data out from under you. So, I've told you some stories about uh planned maintenance and unplanned maintenance. And you know what what what we learn here is that any given data center can blink out of existence, you know, or or be rendered unfit for serving. It doesn't matter that the data center was still there when we deleted that big table because at the minute that that happened um we started serving errors for this wasn't app um and you need to be able to deal with that and there's there's an unending like list of things right I mean I haven't even gotten into like people stealing fiber optic cable or people digging up accidentally you know trenching up fiber optic cable which is you know the the bane of any you know networking company's existence. Um, and you can attempt to harden each site to make them resilient against these things, but it doesn't always work, right? It doesn't matter how many like how many uh how much error correcting RAM I had in that machine if the processor was doing the corruption. Um, it doesn't matter if how many generators I had if you know that if you know if if we you know we roll the dice and eventually the data spontaneously gets deleted, right? Situations will arise that will just that will that will make a mockery of it. It's like the Magno line. you're just going to like they're just going to go around it and you're going to be like oh well now I have to deal with this. So architecturally um what if we learned about app engine and making it more reliant and making it more reliable. Um and so you know philosophically we found that you know people through the ages have uh sort of like have the have the right sort of instinct uh for this kind of thing that we like to find in SR. Um, so here's again the master slave data store and I'm not going to go through a bunch of failure slides but we can just talk about it a little bit which is to say that you know imagine this circumstance data center A can go away at any time. The power can go out and you know we can't get and we can't get it back on in time. Uh you know the data the the one of the data the the big tables that we're relying upon can get spontaneously deleted and we can restore it but again that's going to take some amount of time. um if there could be a network partition that just takes the data center off the map and all of these things conspire that say that okay well we can't serve your application out of here we need to move it but unfortunately there's this little like line marked asynchronous replication on there that makes it hard for us because we've committed certain amounts of data to the data store in A and if we promote B that data is not there and it's not lost because the data center is going to come back and we're going to be able to move it um move it back over but in the meantime if we promote your B2B serving, all of a sudden your application has jumped backwards in time a couple of minutes for all of the writes. And once we do get data center A back online, we say, okay, here's the uncommitted data. Um, I can't say to you just like, oh well, we'll just like shove it into data center B because you may have rewritten that data, you may have deleted it, whatever. We have to say, here's your data. You can decide what to do with it, and we're going away. that's not a good story for you. We're that's that's that's the kind of thing that we're trying to hide from you and that's not a good story for us. We don't want to spend our time doing that either. There's way more interesting problems uh to be solving for us. Um and like I said, you know, you can decide that okay, what we should do is armor the sites. And when we do when we find things that we find some kinds of fragility that we think we can sort of make less common, you know, we'll we we looked at that and we said, all right, we can deal with this kind of thing. Um but you can't anticipate everything. And really what we found on found out is that you need to become agile. You need to be able to leap around. Things are going to come at you like you know like you know your Jackie Chan movie. Things are going to be coming at you from all directions above behind you know things are going to try and fall on you. And the best thing you can do is be able to move quickly so that you can deal with you know you know while you see that coming at you get out of the way then figure out what you do next. And so we thought about this for a while and we looked at sort of the things that improved inside Google infrastructure and we said what can we do about this and the end product is this. It's the high replication data store configuration to app engine. Um and what it is is we run uh we you know we run multiple data centers and you know three is not the actual number. uh and we serve your application out of one of them but all of your rights happen synchronously to all of them before we or to a majority of them using the Paxos algorithm which we talked about in the data store talk and also Leslie Lamport's paper and so we have we commit your rights to a majority of them before we return success to you your application before you return success to the user in the web browser and the beauty of this is that if we instantaneously have to kick your traffic away from data center A to data center B and it really doesn't take too much more effort for me to do that than what I just um then all we can be you know we can move that without a readonly period and we have a we are certain that all of your data is is replicated to a majority of all of the other data centers. if we missed it for for whatever reason there this missed write replication happening in the background it's moving the data back it'll keep all of them up to date eventually and if you have an outage unplanned or planned then we can instantaneously shift the traffic over and note that we're not trying to do backup reads uh from the other from the from the offline data center and the missed write replication is now active so we're queuing up these things once a comes back online whether it's after scheduled maintenance or we've drained traffic away in an emergency or whatever or the network is connect disconnected whatever has happened we're ready to handle it when the when that data center comes back online um and even like cleaner this isolates us from problems in the underlying storage stack which is to say that if you're serving your application out of a um and something gets something happens I mean hiccups in that stack again remember we don't run it we share it with other people and we tempt to isolate it but isolation is really hard so you know if something happens if some amount of traffic some amount of disruption some bug something's going on that uh that disrupts this uh uh this this this situation. Um the mega store layer that that handles all the rights down to the data store uh can look at that and say, you know what, I'm not actually getting a quick response to the reads and the rights out of my local data store. I prefer that one because it's local. I don't have to go to another data center. But if that one's not performing adequately for me, I'm going to ignore it and I'm going to write I'm going to commit my writes over there to the other data centers which are, you know, even though I'm sending it over the network and there's a speed of light issue with how fast it gets there and how fast it gets back, it's still better than waiting several seconds for the local storage option to return. And this this is goes on the minute that there's any performance problems. You know, I don't even you know, we we are aware of what that happened. We and we monitor it, but I don't have to do anything. The system handles this for me in the middle of the night. you know right now at Google IO and it handles it faster than I can react. Uh so we see that you know this is perennial uh theme throughout uh through you know through throughout all of this is that you know if if you think about you know if you think about modern thinking and systems thinking you need to expect the unexpected and you know this is really what this is really what SR uh tries to do. Oh right there's a story I want to tell you but all right so I'll back up to that. Um uh I I thought about the I think I heard that big table story again that wasn't something that happened to me about the spontaneously deleted big table and and I I I thought about that and and my relatives sometimes say to me so what exactly is it that you do all day and um I thought about that story and sort of how to explain it to them and you know how how would I explain that um there's a large system you can think of it sort of like a steam engine and I understand most of the you know it's very elaborate it's stories tall I understand most of it. Um, you know, some parts of it are fuzzier around the edge, unless I get close to it. Um, and we're working around we're working on it, trying to keep it working. And some days gremlins just pop out of the system and do something really unexpected. And you know, you chase them off and you get rid of them. And okay, I'm not likely to see that exact gremlin again, but maybe he's got a cousin and I should make sure that he and his cousin can't come back again. And it's every day it's every day it's a every day it's a new surprise. Um so how do you survive life in production? And here we see uh you know our SR mascot fulfilling its intended purpose in life. U so I talked I made a couple points to you earlier on which is to say we take these things as given. A service running in a given data center can be no more reliable than the least reliable component it utilizes. that we love, you know, the SR teams who run the infrastructure under us, but they have outages, too. And we need to be and, you know, they're they're conforming to the SLAs's that they've promised us, but that doesn't mean that there's not going to be an outage. Um, and also that you can rely on serving your application out of a data center, but you have to handle both scheduled maintenance and surprises that will make it unusable at any time. So, if you're designing a system uh to make uh you know to to if you're designing something like Google, what are the design principles that you need? Um, and I'm, you know, so, so everybody get ready to take notes. I'm going to give you away all of Google's secrets. Um, so here's what here's what we what we have found is the best, uh, option if you want to build a worldwide reliable set of applications. Um, put the application in multiple data centers. You know, basic, but many people get this wrong. Um, your data centers have to be distributed. They can't be behind the same power. They can't be behind the same network. They can't be on the same flood plane. They can't be on the same fault line. It doesn't matter if you have a hundred data centers if they're behind shared infrastructure like that. They're all going to go offline at once. Um be capable of absorbing more than one failure at a time. Having two is not enough because you'll say, "Well, I'm serving out of here and then I'll oh, I'm having problems. Let me move my traffic over here." Certainly nothing is going to happen to your this data center over here before you get data the first data center back online. Right? So, you know, be capable of absorbing more than one failure at a time because the law of perversity will make sure that it'll happen to you. Um, write synchronously. Don't write asynchronously. You'll say, "Okay, well, I can get better performance out of it and it won't be so bad and my users will get used to it and I'll I'll I'll find ways around it." We wanted that to be the case. It doesn't actually work. There's a there's a ceiling to the threshold of reliability that we can offer. We talked about App Engine coming out of uh preview and how we're now going to have an SLA for all paid users. That SLA only applies to high replication to apps using the high replication data store configuration. There's a very specific reason for that. There's only so much reliability we can give you given the asynchronous replication. We try really hard and like we're spending a lot of our time, you know, always trying to improve these things, but there's only so much we can do. Empower the infrastructure. Don't say uh you know don't make it only manual intervention that changes something. Let the megas store layer you know or the writing layer make some uh make some interesting decisions about uh when to when to like abandon you know writing to the local one and write somewhere else. Don't have that be permanent. Like I said don't make permanently dangerous decisions based on anything. Um, and when there is a problem, you know, give me the hand, give me the switch that I can throw that says, move this traffic from here to here as quickly as possible so I can get I can return your application to service and we can all stand around the problem and go, huh, we weren't expecting that to happen. Um, and also if you're trying to build all this, you know, a bunch of SRRES really doesn't hurt who've like but you know, done all these things. So this is a lot of complexity and it's really you know we've we've talked to people talk about the private cloud and it's kind of difficult unfortunately to do all of these things on a small scale. The efficiencies only come when you're doing them on a large scale and they're really difficult and they're really complicated. There are unending piles of bugs that I could tell you about that we found while we were debugging our implementation and we have incredibly smart people anticipating almost all of these things and yet still we had a lot of problems. So if you're interested in building an application that is you know scalable and globally reliable and you know and and not a you know not a manual pain in the ass to administer and fail over you know so these are about the things you have to do or well we think we have a better option uh and as uh people like to say it's available right now um and in fact more than being available right now it's the default as of app engine 1.1 1.5.0 No, we have said high replication is the default. You have to manually make a choice if you want master slave. We don't want you to do that. We are cutting the prices on master slave um you know it on master slave data I'm sorry cutting the prices on high replication uh cutting the prices on high replication data store storage costs to encourage people. There are already migration processes that we have to move your existing apps from master slave to high replication. Um we are working on improving those. That's one of our very top priorities and we expect to have something about that out very shortly probably you know on the order of you know weeks not months you know we want you to move your applications over and so if you I mean we really believe in in this and we we I I hope that you've you've taken away from this this is all of the stuff that we learned about our about you know implementing applications on top of Google's infrastructure and the stuff that we that we set we we experienced taught us what we needed to do to make things better. And we think it works fine if your application is just starting out. Um if you've you know if you've just it's it's a great platform to design to if you've got you know the next great idea that you want to build and monetize or if you're already got a tremendous amount of traffic and you want a better scaling story then well I guess it's time to uh you know send somebody out to the store to buy a bunch more machines and put them in the data center. uh you know and the the beauty of this system is again the dynamic scaling right if you get mentioned on Oprah in the middle of the night when you're sleeping and all of the sudden everybody in the world wants to go to your website or you know Justin Bieber twitters about it or whatever it is the kids do these days um then uh you know then then app engine will allow you to scale this automatically like we you know you'll be ready for whatever traffic and all that will happen is we'll hand you a slightly higher bill that month and you know you know I you know hope you got that monetized properly you know very enthusiastic about that Um, and with that comes an army of us, right? We've got uh we've got uh developer support people. We've got forums that you can interact with uh coming out of preview. We've got paid support options that are um you know, we got paid support options for incidents and for uh uh you know, ticket responses that you know that you can take advantage of if you need this. We're taking this you know, we're we're taking the availability of this very seriously and you get me and my team. We're follow the sun on call coverage. I don't get woken up in the middle of the night by pages. I've got people in other time zones so that you know we can all be really fresh when we're working on these problems, right? It's not crisis. It's not crisis for us. And we'll take our all of that stuff that I mentioned. We'll take care of it for you. Like this is I like that kind of stuff. This is like I I mean I get I'm I wake up and I go, "Well, something's something weird is going to happen to me today most likely and it'll probably be pretty exciting." And I I accept that there's probably something wrong with me and my team that like there's there's like there's something wrong with us. Uh but you know, if if you don't want to have to do it, we'll take care of it for you. Uh if it's because you can focus on on what you're excited about, your domain knowledge, your application. Um on the other hand if that kind of stuff does excite you I am bound by contract to say we are hiring for S sur all over the globe many projects many uh uh many many facil many uh many data centers uh not data centers many offices and we you know there are so many things that we could teach you. So if if that interests you please come talk to me. Um, so I'm folding up uh what I've got to say here. And I'm going to take a moment and get uh get very serious. Uh, and so we need to talk a little bit about transparency. And I don't need to tell you all that, uh, cloud computing is big business. You know, it's, uh, it's not, you know, just some website or, you know, people can, you know, dismiss it all they want, but out there in the customer area, we've got web filings and they're taking Fortune 100 companies, their SEC data, and getting their quarterly filings into the SEC on time with them. That's real money, real jail time for people for non-compliance, right? Congressional investigations, etc., etc. Uh, we hosted the website for the recent royal wedding, right? This is, you know, once in a-lifetime or well, maybe twice when uh when uh Harry gets married, but whatever. Um, you know, so the the uh, you know, a once in a, you know, a unique event, uh, that will, you know, on TV every all eyes on it. And when Accenture said we need an infrastructure to host it, they said app engine, you know, so this there's a lot of money coming into this and we know that we have to treat this very seriously as treat seriously as you treat your users. When we have problems, you need to know about it as quickly as possible. You need to understand what we're doing to make the app engine more reliable that we're working on it, you know, very seriously and then we got the architectural choices that we've made, the improvements that we're working on. um when we start having a problem, you need to know about it as quickly as possible. And so, like I said, we've got the communication, we've got all of these things, SLA for uh paid apps on higher replication once we come out of preview. All of this is saying we are going to tell you what's going on when we have problems. We'll give you a detailed postmortem. You know, we're you know, we're bringing out the SRRES to give talks when I don't have any features to tell you other than you should use HRD and, you know, here's some hilarious stories. Um, so the other story about transparency that's important, uh, is that you need to know when you're having problems before your users know that you're having problems. And those problems aren't necessarily all connected to App Engine's infrastructure. They could also be related to high load that your application is experiencing or a new piece of code. And uh, the story for monitoring App Engine applications hasn't historically been great. This is true for most cloud applications, honestly. And this is something that we know that we need to improve if you're going to actually, you know, if you're going to trust us to say we're as available as we are and give us your money, give us your trust, give us your data. So app so Alan Green, uh, an engineer out of the SRE engineer out of the Sydney office has been working on improving um, the monitoring story for App Engine applications and I'm going to turn this over to him so he can tell you all about what he's been working on. Well done. Hi. So, um, Michael's been telling you about how Google looks after the App Engine platform. Um, and a key part of that is our monitoring tools. Um, so for App Engine, we're monitoring thousands and thousands of statistics about all of the components that make up App Engine. Um, and we're able to spot problems and hopefully find and fix them before your apps even notice. So, I'm going to cover the uh monitoring API um that is going into trusted tester today. I guess the question is why do you need to monitor your apps? If there's this team of Google SR looking after the platform and if uh you're confident in their ability um to u to keep the platform running, why do you even need to monitor your own apps? The answer is like for many simple apps um you don't need to monitor them. they they're so simple and they use such a small fraction of App Engine's capabilities that so long as the platform is stable, they're going to keep running. But for uh more complex apps, the kinds of apps that a business might depend upon for critical functions, um there's some reasons why you might monitor. Um so first the reason is it gives you insight into the the running of the platform. So say data store latency increases slightly um and starts to get to the point where it's affecting your customers. It would be good to know that before your customers start to call you. Um another reason is so that you can get insight into your own application. Uh and a good example of that is mail quotas. So if your app is sending mail, you set a budget for it and App Engine lets you send mail up until you hit that budget. Um but if you're getting close to that budget, it would be good to know because when you hit it, it stops. Um and if you know, you can do something about it in advance. Uh and finally, um it's you need to monitor because you're on the internet um and every crazy person with a computer can see your app. So um Michael mentioned before gripe, gr.p P who were mentioned on Oprah and their traffic graph kind of was going along flat at uh just a couple of requests per second and within a few minutes they're all of a sudden uh serving 250 requests per second and it'd be good to know when something like that happens to your app, right? Um so how many people here actually use a monitoring tool in their organization? A few of you, right? So you'll know all this, but a monitoring tool uh is a program that sits there and it pulls the things that it monitors. Um they can be anything from hardware devices to to databases to servers, your own software. Um but the important thing is that um when something goes wrong, it tells you about it um and lets you look at the history of what's happened to the service. So there's a quite a number of different monitoring tools, but uh three of the big ones out there are Najios, Zabix, and HP OpenView. You might have heard those names before. What this API does is lets you uh integrate uh your App Engine app into the monitoring tool um so that you can see it the same way you see everything else in your service. Uh so diving down a little bit more into the API, here are the things you need to know about it. It's experimental. We're putting this out there so that we can get some feedback about whether we're providing the right information about your apps to you. Uh whether we're providing it in a good form. Um it's the information that it exposes is all the stuff that's currently on the dashboard. So um just flick over and have a look at this app's dashboard. uh here. So, um the number of requests per second coming in, uh all this good stuff, how many instances you're currently running, how much memory you're currently using, all of that now comes out through the monitoring API, as well as all of the quota information that's that's on the dashboard. Oh, so the because it's a standard API, you can use uh the Google API explorer to um to get u you can use the Google API explorer to to investigate the API. So there's two methods we're providing. One is uh apps.list to list all of the applications that you have. Um and it's all secured. So let's try to execute this. We see the results down here. Oh, we need to be authenticated. We must have. And there we go. These are all of the applications that this user is allowed to see um that this user is an administrator of. Um, so let's just take one of these and uh look at the counters. We call them counters. Um, but it's just the statistics. The reason for that is the most interesting ones are usually just simple counters. So, and then the results come back. Um, lovely JSON list. Skip down to an interesting one here. um how many memcache calls have been made. Uh and today this app's done 486,274 so far. So that's the form of the API, just two calls. Great. Um if you're programming to it, here's an example in Python. Um typical Google API. So you get your credentials. U you go and ask for details about the service. in this uh in this case app engine monitoring version alpha 1 um and then you can do things with the API so uh list all of the apps and then list all the counters um okay so that's the API very simple uh let's dive into an example um I built an app here um this is why they don't let S sur write userfacing code there are Um, so very simple app. There's three URLs. There's slash here, which is the home URL. Um, you can write some more news. Um, or you can view news in a way that allows you to page through. That just takes a little. Okay. So, let's say you've got all of this monitoring integrated. everything's happy. Um, it's serving away. Um, and then one night your pager actually goes off and it says, um, excuse me, there's a lot of CPU usage all of a sudden. Um, so you jump into Zabix and you have a look at the graphs. Um, this red line here is the alerting level. So if CPU usage goes over this line for more than a few samples, it will um, it will sound an alert. Um, and you can see here that CPU usage was pegging along at like under a thousand mega per minute per second for uh quite a long time. And then all of a sudden it's uh jumped up and it's now using 33,000 uh mega per second uh which is a lot of CPUs. Um, so when something like this goes wrong, um, and CPU usage spikes like this, then either something's changed in the code or you're getting like some different stimulus to the application. Um, and so the next graph you might want to look at then is how much traffic are we getting on each of the different paths coming in to the application. So this red line here is uh requests to the the homepage and you can see they're pegging along pretty consistently at 11 or 12 requests per second. But then just lately we've started getting requests in for slash news which is different. So that's a bit suspicious. Um then we can dive down uh and have a look at underneath the application what API calls it's making. Uh this graph is showing the number of calls per second to the data store in the green line and to memcache in the the purple line there. And memcache it's a bit spiky but you know generally doing somewhere between 10 and 20 calls per second. It's all good and the data store is doing very few calls until just recently. So that looks like it might might be the problem. Um and so let's put together what we've discovered through the monitoring API so far. We've got um a massive increase in CPU, uh massive increase in data store usage, no increase in memcache usage, and a little bit of extra traffic coming in on one path. Um that would suggest to me that um one that one path that's serving a tiny little bit of traffic is serving it uncashed but instead going straight to the data store and doing some something very complex and not actually uh not actually caching the result. Uh and in fact because I wrote this dodgy app I know that's exactly what's happening. Um possible solutions here is find what it is that's sending traffic to your app. um I'm not a foyer code to um properly use memcache for that URL. Um right, so that's um pretty much the monitoring API, what it is and how to use it. It exposes dashboard stats. Um it's compatible with pretty much any monitoring tool. They all require a little bit of stitching up to make it all code together. Um, it's powered by App Engine because it turns out that if you want to write at Google, if you want to write a distributed app that works across multiple data centers, um, it's highly reliable and available, App Engine's a great way to do that. Um, and we have a trusted tester program for this. Um, if you're uh, monitoring currently or thinking about monitoring and are interested in joining up, um, you can go to this short URL or you can come talk to us after the presentation. Thanks. Thanks, dude. All right, so we're about to fold it up here and uh just so you know this just so you know where you were in case you fell asleep. Uh this is life in App Engine production, Google IO 2011. Uh I'm Michael Handler. That was Alan Green giving you the extent of the monitoring demo. You can talk about this. Please give us feedback on this. I'd love to see what see what you thought. uh the trusted tester um API where you know we're love we're definitely enthusiastic about getting people uh into that program and learning some more about it. Um there's been some really interesting talks uh that unfortunately you have to go back in time to see them but I've got a link uh to one that's incredibly relevant if you want even more architectural details of the higher replication data store configuration versus the uh master slave uh data store configuration. Alfred Fuller and Matt Wilder. Matt's another SRE on my team. Uh they gave a talk earlier today called More Nines, Please under the covers of the high replication data store. And they'll give you they've got animated diagrams in their PowerPoint. It's fantastic. I thoroughly recommend you watch the video. Um so we've actually run our the clock out a little bit. So I'm not going to take any questions here, but uh Alan and I are going to be waiting outside. We'll take some questions out there and uh we might have some of the other app engine app engine developers and SRRES around if you wanted to ask questions about production. Thank you so much for coming and enjoy the rest of IO.